---
permalink: /
title: "C.P. Deodhar: Father of the Hard Gelatin Capsule in India"
excerpt: "About Mr. Deodhar"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
- /about/
- /about.html
---

A capsule containing medicine has become an integral part of our day-to-day
life. We swallow capsules multiple times but hardly pause to consider what is
this capsule made of? How is it made? Who made it? However, Mr. C. P. Deodhar
was possessed with these problems 50 years back, when the hard gelatine capsule
was totally a foreign product, being imported into India, filled as well as
empty, by the then Indian multinational pharmaceutical companies.

  Mr. Deodhar took his M.Sc. Degree in 1954 in Biochemistry, aspiring to work
on a drug for incurable diseases, or similar such research-based work. At that
very time one of his close relatives suggested to him the subject of hard
gelatine capsules. Mr. Deodhar took up the project, as it sounded quite
challenging. He also thought that, if he succeeded in his project, he would be
helping save the nation valuable foreign exchange spent otherwise on importing
capsules.



  In the year 1954, hard gelatine capsules were mainly manufactured in the
world by only two American Companies. The capsule manufacturing technology was
a closely guarded secret, inaccessible to any outsider. After extensive
study of the available literature at the then UDCT library and innumerable
experiments carried on with untiring zeal, patience, and perseverance; Mr.
Deodhar succeeded in producing the first capsule in India, made by hand on
plastic dipping moulds in the year 1956. He thereafter created a semiautomatic
capsule machine in 1958 at Malad, Mumbai, with commercial production starting
in October 1958. 



  Capsules were now produced and supplied to pharma companies. Efforts were
continuously being made for quality improvement in  process technology and
production . Because of this indigenous production, the import of capsules to
India ceased in 1961.



  Mr. Deodhar was at the forefront of this entire process. He encountered faced
a number of challenges and complicated issues singlehandedly, in very adverse
situations, in the absence of  financial as well as technical support from any
quarter. 



  In the process, Mr Deodhar realized the need for a fully automatic Capsule
making machine, to produce the best quality capsules. Importing one then cost
around Rs 40 lakhs, which was beyond his reach. However, to fulfil his dream of
producing superior quality capsules on a fully automatic machine, Mr Deodhar
took the support of a company which purchased and installed two
such imported machines in Mumbai. In lieu of this he had to sell them the
semi-automatic unit produced by him and the necessary technology which he had
developed as well as agree to work with them as an
employee. Achieving his dream took priority in his mind as he started working
relentlessly on this project. 



  Mr. Deodhar, however, being a firm believer in the highest quality of Capsule
production, proposed to make a trip to the US to study the latest
developments in Capsule manufacturing there. This was opposed by his employers
who were by then enjoying the profit reaped by the monopoly in Capsule
production. Mr Deodhar therefore decided to make a trip abroad at his own
expense. In this trip to the US, he succeeded in visiting Capsule factories,
establishing contacts and having detailed discussions with legendary people in
the field, and returning fully charged with ideas of improvements in achieving
the best quality product. He managed to use this acquired knowledge in practice
upon return. 



  His zest for quality and development was relentless and he realised the need
for a team with financial backing and a well-equipped laboratory. He found this
support in a leading Pharmaceutical Company in Mumbai which he
joined in 1977. They willingly backed him in this shared endeavour of quality
pursuit in capsule production.



  They succeeded in improving the performance of their indigenous fully
automatic capsule making machine by carrying out necessary modifications and
started producing capsules in a big way. Mr. Deodhar got a free hand in
implementing all his ideas regarding the ideal production conditions in the
Gelatine Room, Air Conditioning system, Drying system, etc. and he helped to
build this company into the foremost supplier of empty gelatine Capsules in
India. 



  Today, they are the leading exporters of capsules to several countries in the
world including the U.S.A. Mr. Deodhar was fortunate enough to see his dream
realized in his lifetime. His years of dedicated work has borne this sweet
fruit, which is a matter of pride to the nation also.


  During this period, he also developed ink and edible lake colours required
for the capsule, which were being imported all along. He has developed
Printer’s Roller Composition from the capsule wastage useful in printing
operations. 



  One of his notable qualities was documentation of his work. His meticulously
written diaries over the years daily, are proof of that. This documentation
helped him to compile further detailed literature on the technical knowledge of
Capsule manufacturing for benefit of the pharmaceutical industry and the users
of Capsule.  He wrote a book for pharmacy students on Hard Gelatine Capsules in
India. He also wrote a book in Marathi “Hard Gelatine Capsule ani Mi”(Hard
Gelatine Capsules and Me), wherein he has penned his struggle for developing
the capsule. 



  When asked, he cited his sources of inspiration to be Sir Thomas Alva Edison
and Madame Marie Curie. These scientists were his idols since childhood from
whom he imbibed the lesson “not to give up until you succeed.



  It took fifty years of hard work, perseverance, patience, and diligence to
produce international quality capsules in India. The Indian capsules are very
well accepted now all over the world and are being exported to a number of
countries including the USA. 



  After fifty years of untiring work and upon completion of his mission, at the
age of 75, he shifted from Mumbai to Pune, as was his desire.



  His tremendous sense of commitment to the field continued, as he taught the
subject of Capsules to pharmacy students in Pune and gave lectures across
pharmacy colleges all over India. 



  The empty gelatine Capsule that looks so small and tiny however involves a
very complex and precision demanding manufacturing process. To manufacture a
good capsule, one requires thorough knowledge of gelatine chemistry, grease
chemistry, instrumentation engineering, mechanical engineering, chemical
engineering, air conditioning and microbiology. 

  Mr. Deodhar was only a qualified biochemist. However, being an ardent student
and a researcher at heart, he mastered knowledge in all these above fields,
from various experts in these disciplines as well as from his own personal
study and observations. With his experience and knowledge, he became a sort of
an encyclopaedia for the hard gelatine capsule and was fondly known as ‘Capsule
Deodhar’ in his field. 



  He is rightfully recognised as the “Father of Hard Gelatine Capsule in
India”. 


